Welcome to the Petty Profit Podcast, where we talk about news, politics, and culture from a Christian worldview.
I am your host Joel Berry, and I am glad to be with you.
Thank you for tuning in.
A few months ago, I appeared as a guest on the StoryGeek's podcast, and we talked about the hero's journey.
I will link to it in the show notes if you want to check that out, but I continued to listen to the podcast, and the other day I was listening to a discussion on Tolkien.
and the Lord of the Rings.
And they were talking about a term that I had never heard before, something called ucatastrophe.
That's ucatastrophe spelled E-U-C-A-S-T-R-O-P-H-E. And it refers to that moment in all the best stories, the timeless stories, the fairy tales, the ones that have a happy ending.
That moment where all hope seems lost, the hero's defeat seems imminent, and then suddenly
Suddenly something happens.
Something happens that allows the hero to triumph against all odds.
And I was fascinated by that word and that concept.
And so I decided to do a little digging into Tolkien.
I read his essay called on fairy stories.
And I loved it so much.
I figured I would bring you some thoughts from it.
So I hope you enjoy this week's episode.
Before I jump into it here, I'll remind you that you can reach out to me at contact at thepetiprofit.com or you can go on to the website.
It's thepetiprofit.com and you can click on the contact form.
You can write me.
You can ask questions.
And if your question is good enough, we might answer it on the man hug.
So we haven't done a question answer mailbag type episode on the podcast yet.
So if there's something you'd like us to discuss, if you have a question, be sure to reach out.
And as always, if you have a mind to do so, go to iTunes, give us five star review.
That really helps us, helps us climb up the charts, beat that algorithm so that more listeners can find out about this podcast.
It is all greatly appreciated and thank you for your support.
But without further delay, let's jump into the episode.
This week, we're talking about you catastrophe.
Today, I would like to talk about mankind's greatest desire and most important need, a need that has been deeply felt by every human being throughout all of history.
So naturally, I will be talking about escapist entertainment.
on its face that sounds like a joke, but I think the connections between our greatest need and our most cherished myths, whether they be superhero flicks or space operas, whatever they are, I think those connections are deeper than they seem.
I recently read J.R.R.
Tolkien's essay on fairy stories, came away with so many thoughts, and I've struggled to really organize them and communicate them in a way that makes sense.
And as you'll hopefully see a little bit when I
delve further into this.
That's what happens when you try to describe something divine and infinite, but hopefully at least some of this comes across to as a coherent thought.
I loved Tolkien's essay on fairy stories and found it very encouraging because right now we live in insane times because everywhere we look in entertainment, social media, news in our cities,
We are smacked in the head over and over again with depictions of mankind's cruelty, malice, malevolence, brokenness, and hatred.
Everything seems to be crumbling all around us.
Every one seems to be going insane.
And the hope that any of this may get better seems to slip away a little more and more every day.
So is this idea of escapist entertainment of Fool's errand?
Well, it's definitely fallen out of fashion recently.
Even our movies and TV shows that feature magic, spaceships, fantastical creatures, all seem obsessed with being steeped in grim, godless materialism with this idea of reminding the viewer about our present-day horrors and injustices.
And it's possible true escapism never really was in fashion.
I think at some level, our culture has always looked down
on escapist entertainment.
Our myths, our fairy tales, you know, the recent Marvel movies might be one example of this have always been seen as something less worthy.
Escapism might be a nice emotional diversion, folks may say, but the most worthy stories in entertainment are those that address the problems in our world, in the here and now.
Take this article
I recently read, for example, and I'll link to it in the show notes, but the headline is, in the age of Trump, escapist entertainment has become an impossibility.
And here the writer suggests that due to the gravely serious times we live in, quote, perhaps fiction, even the lighthearted television variety has a responsibility to keep us alert to our reality rather than inspire us to escape it.
So is escapism foolish?
are fairy stories as J.R.R.
Tolkien described them foolish.
To that question, Tolkien might smile and say, well, I don't know.
Would you suggest to a prisoner or a slave that escapism is a fool's errand?
You see, most of our culture today is in a prison.
We are imprisoned by a philosophy called materialism.
We have believed the lie
that the physical universe is all there is, all there was, and all there ever will be, as Carl Sagan said.
Only that which can be detected by the senses and through science should be considered real.
So, we look for value within the four walls of the jail cell.
We look for value and purpose and we don't find it.
We look for morality, for goodness, for peace within those four walls and we don't find it.
And our culture is angry and confused as a result.
But imagine for a minute you have been imprisoned in this jail cell your whole life.
You might have every reason to believe the four walls are all there is.
But then imagine one day you see a sliver of bright light shine through the cracks in the door.
Or maybe you hear birds chirping outside or the sound of children laughing.
You might start to wonder about the world outside.
Maybe you'd even start to long for it to know more about it.
or perhaps even escape to it.
And that's my problem with some of the big pieces of entertainment that have captured the public imagination in recent years, and I'll cite two examples, the first one being Game of Thrones and the second one being The Last of Us, which was a video game, if you're not into video games.
Sorry.
But Game of Thrones really captured the imagination of our culture.
I think part of the reason it was so effective is that it was brutally honest about the darkness and unfairness of the physical world.
It was bleak.
It was horrifically bleak.
And it was that way on purpose.
George RR Martin, the writer of the books that inspired the show, is a self-proclaimed atheist.
And he set out to write, in his words, an answer to Tolkien, an anti- Tolkien fantasy tale, a more realistic one.
One where evil often wins and heroic character arcs get inexplicably cut short by rape or murder.
In this universe, power is an end unto itself, and religion is just another political tool.
It's life in the state of nature, nasty, brutish, and short.
In our Martin's universe, human beings are just another animal.
Just like worms, wolves, and fish, they're in an endless cycle of living, eating, mating, fighting, and dying that continues forever.
In the words of R.R.
Martin, in an interview with Entertainment Weekly, he said, if there's a benevolent loving God, why is the world full of rape and torture?
Why do we even have pain?
And in his honest, unflinching look at the reality within the four walls of our physical existence, Martin created a very engaging work of fiction.
But many, who watched the show, unsurprisingly walked away feeling hopeless.
The Last of Us, part two,
video game, and a more recent example, might appear to be escapist since it involves apocalyptic cities and zombies, but like Game of Thrones, it approaches reality with the bleak outlook of materialism.
It goes out of its way to kill beloved characters with senseless cruelty, to cut short character arcs before they can be complete, and remind you time and time again that human beings are awful, horrible creatures who do awful, horrible things.
It all unfolds just as it might in real life.
And the intention of the storytellers is clear here.
The message is this, that the universe is all there is, all there was, and all there ever will be.
There is no design, no grand storyteller, no creator, or just creatures fighting it out in a Petri dish.
This isn't good or evil, it's one man's good versus another man's good, and it all results in senseless death either way.
And again, people who play the game walked away feeling hopeless.
Now, in both of these cases, people blame poor writing for how unsatisfying these stories were, but I think that's only half the problem.
These stories don't resonate, because while they tell the story of the physical world very effectively, they are only telling half the story, because the physical world isn't all there is.
Now enter J.R.R.
Tolkien, and the fairy tale, and what Tolkien called the euchatastrophe,
which means good catastrophe.
In a euchatastrophe, the storyteller, after establishing the dismal hopelessness of physical reality, then consoles us with a glimpse of a higher reality, where right and wrong, good and evil, justice and mercy are all as real as the flesh on our bones.
In these stories, just when all hope seems lost, and the hero's defeat seems sure,
When the pain and sorrow of existence are portrayed with painful honesty, there is a sudden straightening of the universe towards ultimate justice.
This is the point in the story, the book or the movie, where the hero triumphs over evil against all odds.
And for the euchatastrophe to work, it has to make logical sense in the story.
It can't be a cheap trick.
It must have, as Tolkien said, the inner consistency of reality.
And when it's properly executed, it results in an almost spiritual experience of joy and relief.
You'll feel goosebumps, you'll shed tears, you'll clap, and you'll cheer.
Just listen to some of these audience reactions during the moment of euchatastrophe in the Avengers.
When all hope seems lost, defeat is inevitable, and then suddenly the Avengers are resurrected and unite to fight the villain Thanos.
There was no denying the effectiveness of that scene, you know, with the score in that moment of incredible triumph in the face of tremendous odds.
You can go on YouTube and you can find dozens of these just rapturous theater reactions to this moment of euchatastrophe in the movie, The Avengers.
But for me, nothing tops the battle of Helms Deep in Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, the second book in the series, the second movie in that trilogy.
And I had the pleasure of experiencing this moment for the first time having never read the books, so I didn't know how it was going to end.
Here we see the heroes facing certain defeat.
Their boxed in at Helms Deep, Saron's forces have breached the walls of the city and will soon reach the inner caverns where the women and children are hiding.
We see eight-year-old boys being fitted with helmets and swords too large for them.
their lips trembling as they prepare to fight and die to the last.
There is nothing that can stop the slaughter.
But then the sun rises.
We look to the east and we see Gandalf on a hill overlooking the battle with a cavalry at his back.
He charges Sauron's army and we are treated to this moment.
And try and notice the one dissonant cord as the charging armies collide as good meets evil, light meets dark, hope meets despair.
These are moments of true escapism, the very best kind, when people are given a glimpse of the light outside our dreary four walls.
A glimpse of ultimate reality, ultimate justice, ultimate truth.
It's when all the hopes and desires of the audience are met in one decisive moment.
Tolkien described the euchatastrophe this way in his essay on fairy stories.
He said, It is a sudden and miraculous grace
never to be counted on to recur.
It does not deny the existence of sorrow and failure.
The possibility of these is necessary to the joy of deliverance.
Instead, it denies, in the face of much evidence, if you will, the idea of universal final defeat.
It is Evangelium, the good news.
Giving a fleeting glimpse of joy, joy beyond the walls of this world, every bit as poignant as grief.
joy which produces tears because it is qualitatively so like sorrow, because it comes from those places where joy and sorrow are at one, reconciled, as selfishness and altruism are lost in love.
Now there's no denying the power of such a moment in storytelling.
I think it's because the glory outside these dreary four walls is real.
I could try against everything I observe in reality to deny it or suppress it, but there's no denying we all have a longing within us.
Euchatastrophe is not just a consolation for the sorrow of the world.
It is the satisfaction of a longing.
And if you found yourself unsatisfied by the stories of Game of Thrones, or The Last of Us, or others, I would urge you to pay attention to where that dissatisfaction is coming from, and reflect on what you might be longing for.
And here is where we get one step closer to the story of Christianity.
C.S.
Lewis, in his fantasy world of Narnia, had what he called the Deep Magic, something that we Christians call the Law of Sin and Death.
We all know about the Deep Magic.
We experience it every day.
But if you read Lewis' Narnia books, you'll know there is also something called the Deeper Magic from before the dawn of time.
We might call that the Law of the Spirit of Life,
made possible by the sacrifice of Jesus.
All the sorrow, heartbreak, and condemnation of our sin met the infinite love of God and it happened the moment the word became flesh.
The Old Testament with its horrific war, bloodshed, and death showed us the catastrophe, the law of sin and death.
The birth of Christ was mankind's euchatastrophe.
The crucifixion with its horrific murder of innocent Jesus showed us the catastrophe
the law of sin and death, but the resurrection was our euchatastrophe.
All of history, past and present, points to this event.
All of our storytelling looks back to it and looks forward to the joy of eternity and ultimate justice.
Today, we are limited to a fleeting glimpse, array of sunlight, or the sound of laughter outside the jail cell.
As the scriptures say, we see through a glass darkly, but someday,
will be face to face with ultimate truth, ultimate justice, and ultimate love and grace in the stories that tell the whole truth, both the truth of our present reality and the truth of the higher reality, the deeper magic.
Those are the stories that stick with you.